hi everyone Calum slingerland here for
music notes blog and it is time for
review before we get going here I just
want to say happy new year and thank you
very much for tuning in and watching and
since 2013 is just getting underway
there isn't a whole lot out there in
terms of new music yet however one such
record that happened to strike me so far
within this very young new year is this
one and that ladies and gentlemen would
be fade by yo lo tengo yo lo tengo is an
American indie rock act formed in
hoboken new jersey by husband-wife duo
IRA Kaplan and Georgia hubli IRA is
commonly known to play guitar piano and
sing in the band while his wife Georgia
handles the drumming end of things along
with some vocals here and there now the
wonderful thing about this band is that
they've been around since the year
nineteen eighty four so if you do the
math that adds up to around 30 odd years
of music making and over those 30 odd
years they've produced a total of
thirteen studio albums fade being
thirteenth I was first drawn to this
band for a number of reasons number one
I really like the way they weave in
different stylistic influences of
experimental rock and other genres such
as dream pop and with their indie
stylings and the fact that they have an
album titled I am Not Afraid of you and
I will beat your ass and within these 30
odd years with their 13 albums and their
slew of eps and they've also dabbled in
some film score work i should mention it
built up a fairly devout fan following
which is also very cool to see there
hasn't really been an album in their
catalog that i have completely disliked
there are ones that stand out more than
others certainly but there is not one
that i have completely hated for one or
more reasons and as far as fade goes i
personally find it just another day at
the office for the band not to say that
it isn't a spectacular record but rather
they make this whole let's put out
material for 30-odd years thing easy the
first thing i really enjoyed when it
came to listening to fade was the
certain atmosphere that the album
creates when you listen to it like i
mentioned earlier
apart from dwelling in the indie rock
genre yo lo tengo as a habit of breaking
out into more experimental and dream pop
areas as well which makes for an
interesting listen with edit of this
sort of experimental atmosphere breaks
out firstly with the opening track ohm
which like its namesake really offers up
arguably a meditative environment while
listening the track is characterized by
drumbeats and guitar chords which are
often repetitive through the early going
of the track a fuzz diode electric
guitar also gets added in there soon
after which creates just an immense wall
of sound and also adds some wonderful
vocal harmonies in on top of that which
are almost barely audible over the wall
of sound that's going on behind them
which I thought was a very cool
production technique in and of itself
and while I did say that the track was a
fair bit repetitive in regards to its
structure it certainly didn't leave me
disinterested as that word might imply I
definitely did feel more calm and
relaxed and at peace even more towards
the end of the track when everything
just kind of fades out to a nice call
also in terms of atmosphere the band
doesn't shy away at all for some more
upbeat numbers as well most notably
tracks such as well you better and
paddle for both our tracks that are full
of energy and full of life and that is
largely characterized thanks to hub
Lee's energetic style of drumming it's
around the album's midpoint where things
start to take a turn for the quieter
more dreamy aspects to the band likes to
explore as well and though these
laid-back peaceful tracks may want to
put you to sleep that certainly isn't a
bad place to be stupid things is a nice
example of a very dynamic tracks it's a
nice straightforward piece that grows
and dynamics ever so slightly but soon
comes back down again I'll be around
follow suit as a homie honest track with
a one man one guitar performance from
Kaplan up front it also has a droning
keyboard line in the back which adds for
some sort of electronic element in there
Cornelia and Jane sees hubli step out
from behind the drum kit for a bid to
handle the lead vocal duties on this one
but one other simple straightforward
track in terms of repetition by the band
it also includes some tasteful musical
work from both the brass section and a
slide guitar in parts do trains is pro
probably the closest we'll get on this
album to a true straight up dream pop
sound upon listening to it you'll notice
it's incredibly in the same vein as such
a style with its layers upon layers of
nice guitar under all these layers is an
almost inaudible percussion line with
hubli keeping the bead ever so quietly
the point of it is another quaint honest
number that i really liked on the album
it could always be considered somewhat
of a sister track to something like I'll
be around with very nice electronics
being woven in behind both acoustic and
electric guitars now everything seems to
come together in a very grandiose
fashion on the album's final track
before we run the song is around six
minutes in length and can be evenly
divided up into a beginning portion and
an end portion while the beginning
portion contains most i guess the meat
of the song the back half is an ending
within itself in the back half the
string section lines up alongside the
brass section showcasing the band's
excellent sense of arrangement and as
I've been mentioning all through this
section on atmosphere another thing I
really enjoyed about fade was the real
musical sense of intelligence which not
a lot of bands in this genre I feel can
lay claim to perhaps it comes with
nearly 30 years of making records and
being in the business but yo lo tengo
has something that I feel separates them
from other bands within the indie canon
as I've been alluding to I'm quite a big
fan of their incorporation of both
strings and brass instruments on certain
tracks and really their sense of
arrangement and knowing when to use
these instruments and in what situations
is truly a musical gift and at the end
of the day fade stands is yet another
excellent addition to the ever-growing
back catalogue of yo la tengo it really
stood out to me through the band's
sensible use and creation of a certain
musical atmosphere that only they have
all while demonstrating their musical
intelligence there are some loud moments
on this album there is an entire
grouping of songs that is dedicated to
being more quiet and relaxed and
laid-back and that dynamic shift is
something I really enjoyed about
listening to this from start to finish
my books paid Ghetts a solid four star
rating well not necessarily delving into
any sort of
uncharted sonic territory yo lo tengo
plainly show with this album that they
are good at what they do and it also
shows that they are capable of taking
from and drawing upon past musical
feelings and ideas and turning them into
a meaningful new record but of course
this is just my personal opinion what
did you think of fade have you heard it
yet are you waiting to hear it did you
like it did you not like it let me know
in the comments below Calum slingerland
music notes blog till next time